title: What Exactly is "Beating the Market"
published: True
date_posted: 1 Sep 21
category: general
author: Charles
index: 2
duration: 5 min read
tags: [ Alpha, Stock Selection, Investing]
description: Jensen's Alpha, Factor Investing & the investing holy grail of outperforming the market. 

When I first started investing, I tried sticking to the general advice given by Benjamin Graham in his well-known investing book *The Intelligent Investor*. In the book, he illustrated the various pitfalls faced by a retail investor with respect to value investing, and concluded that perhaps it would be wise to simply put your money into the broad market index. So I did just that. I bought a couple of shares of the S&P500, and called it a day. A few months went by, and as I started researching about the stock market, I thought to myself, "Hey, am I missing something? Why are these trendy stocks performing better than the S&P by such a large margin?". In the spirit of experimentation, I bought some of the shares just to "test it out". After another few months of "real-time empirical study", it dawned on me that while the flow of these stocks are stronger at times, their ebb are even greater in magnitude. That is, when stocks run hot, they start to gather media attention, investors flock to the scene, and the momentum compounds. At some point, the coverage begins to lose steam, investors pull their money out, and the stock prices end up lower than their starting point. The analogy that came to my head at that point in time, was that of a Keirin race, where those who break away from the pack at the start of the race inevitably falls behind when the race ends. 

Nonetheless, I figured that if I want to become an active fund manager some years down the road, I have to try to perform above the benchmark, no matter how futile the endeavor. I started researching more about <a class="ui-tooltip" title="Factor investing is an investment methodology that seeks to explain the difference in stock returns using quantifiable variables or 'factors'. Some well-known factors include size, value, momentum, industry etc."><i style="cursor: help;">factor investing</i></a>, and built my personal portfolio around some of the central philosophies. I don't intend to pose as an expert in factor research, so this article mostly serves as a repository of what I uncovered thus far. Enjoy!

##### What is the market?
Before we go on to talk about strategies employed to outperform the market, it is perhaps prudent to first thoroughly examine the composition of the benchmark. That is, the S&P500. The S&P500 is a capitalization-weighted index of the 500 largest companies in the United States, first conceptualized by the Standard Statistics Company in the 1923. It is generally regarded as the default benchmark in the asset management industry, in part due to its historical significance. Addition into the index is governed by a Standard & Poor's committee, with a specific <a class="ui-tooltip" title="The eight primary criteria are: market capitalization, liquidity, domicile, public float, Global Industry Classification Standard and representation of the industries in the economy of the United States, financial viability, length of time publicly traded, and stock exchange. To remain indicative of the largest public companies in the United States, the index is reconstituted quarterly. "><i style="cursor: help;">methodology</i></a> in place to ensure the quality of the companies. Intuitively, it shouldn't come as a surprise that the largest companies in the largest economy in the world have the best performing stocks in the universe of public equities at any present moment, especially if you believe in the idea that a business's valuation is derived from the future free cash flow that it generates discounted by its cost of capitals (though there are contradicting empirical studies that suggests the superiority of small cap returns). And in a sense, investing in the S&P500 is akin to factor investing, with market cap as the primary predictor of future returns. With that established, the natural follow-up question is: Are there other factors that can yield a higher return compared to the benchmark? Notable investors seem to believe there are, with the value factor as their frontrunning bet. 

##### Value is the true alpha
Value was first theorized as a potential factor which promises outsized returns in 1928, by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd at Columbia Business School. They subsequently published their work in text form in 1934, titled *Security Analysis*<sup>1</sup>. This was well before the concept of efficient markets and the S&P500 came into prominence, so their research backdrop wasn't as much as finding ways to beat the market, but more of determining the financial characteristics of successful public-traded companies. The value predictors that they suggested were: 1) Low price to book ratio, 2) High dividend yield, and 3) Low price to earning multiples. The 1934 classic by Graham and Dodd laid the foundations for value investing, which subsequently propelled investors like Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger, Seth Klarman and many others into the limelight of the investment management industry. However, the fact that there is no single standard definition of 'value' securities means it is more accurate to view 'value' as a basket of indicators describing the 'cheapness' of a stock against the broad market indices, rather than a single predictor of outsized stock returns. Naturally, considerations like timing and geography can have huge impact on the stickiness of such indicators, and by extension the longevity of isolated strategies. 

##### Momentum on the rise
Another favorite amongst the investing community is the momentum factor, which seemingly run contrary to the value hypothesis. Advocates of momentum as a factor for equity outperformance argue on the grounds of price stickiness, claiming that winning stocks tend to continue performing well in the near term. There are no shortage of empirical studies<sup>2,</sup><sup>3,</sup><sup>4</sup> proving the effectiveness of the momentum factor, but the comprehension of its underlying mechanism remains elusive.

##### Other potential candidates 
Besides the two aforementioned styles of investing, there are other flavors of factor investing as well, with names of quality, defensive, all-weather, thematic, macro etc, but their underlying philosophies are more or less the same. Hedge funds like Two Sigma and PanAgora rely on proprietary technology to track the attractiveness of such strategies and invest accordingly. 

##### Does the jack of all trade shine brightest?
Some researchers believe that a combination of multiple factors works better than any single factor, with the idea of protecting against the timing drawback of individual factors. Others believe that we can use macroeconomic indicators and other high-frequency data points to track the trendiness of individual factor regime and switch according to their respective cheapness. 

##### Upshot
An important point to consider is the effects of factor crowding. That is, the more popular a strategy becomes, the higher the liquidity and drawdown risk when there is a sharp sentiment change in the market. Not to mention, crowding limits the return potential of a factor strategy as a wider pool of market participants bid up the prices of a selected few alpha-generating stocks. Ideally you want to be the first to discover any factor strategy, but with stock prices being a continuous-time and dynamic process, tracking the length of queue in a strategy is never an easy endeavor. Perhaps it is prudent for all of us to be wary of diving head first into 'the next big thing'. On the other hand, we can make a bet on mean-reversion, arguing that assets that seem cheap at current valuations would be revalued accordingly by investors, hence allowing us to profit from such market mispricings. I hold a personal view that history doesn't repeat itself, but there are many quants out there who believes (with concrete empirical evidences) that history does rhyme, so it might be the case that I am completely wrong on this front.

**Footnote:**

[[1]](https://www.amazon.com/Security-Analysis-Principles-Benjamin-Graham/dp/007141228X) Security analysis: principles and technique. - B. Graham & D. Dodd (1934)

[[2]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/eufm.12247) Value and Momentum Everywhere - C. Asness, T. Moskowitz & L. Pedersen (2013)

[[3]](https://econpapers.repec.org/article/blajfinan/v_3a56_3ay_3a2001_3ai_3a2_3ap_3a699-720.htm) Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations - N. Jegadeesh & S. Titman

[[4]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/0022-1082.95722) International Momentum Strategies - G. Rouwenhorst
